Add new post about asyncapi github actions (#72)
asyncapi/website: content/blog/asyncapi-github-actions.md

---

> title: "GitHub Actions for AsyncAPI aka Automate your workflows related to AsyncAPI documents"

Reviewer: Isn't that title too looooong? 😄

Author: maybe, but I don't see it as a problem really, at least you know what it is

Reviewer: Fair enough but give it another thought before deciding to leave it as it is.

date: 2020-03-31T06:00:00+01:00
type: blog
featured: true
tags:
  - GitHubActions
  - Validation
  - Generator
  - Automation
cover: /images/posts/asyncapi-github-action.png
weight: 100
authors:
  - name: Lukasz Gornicki
    photo: /images/avatars/lpgornicki.png
    link: https://twitter.com/derberq
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Dev Comm Keeper
---

> tl;dr
AsyncAPI community got rich with two GitHub Actions that you can use for [validation](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/asyncapi-github-action) and [generation](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/generator-for-asyncapi-documents).

> There is no better reason to work on a solution if there is a bag of swags waiting for you. GitHub organized a [hackathon for GitHub Actions](https://githubhackathon.com/#hackathon), and it was the best moment to write a GitHub Action that can help AsyncAPI community.

Reviewer: really? no better reason? :trollface:

Author: nope, not really :trollface:

> Two AsyncAPI related actions we crafterd in March are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two AsyncAPI related actions we crafted in March are:
```

- Our community member, [Waleed Ashraf](https://twitter.com/WaleedAshraf01/) created [an action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/asyncapi-github-action) to validate AsyncAPI documents with our [parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/)
- We also created [official AsyncAPI action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/generator-for-asyncapi-documents) for our [generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/).

## Writing a GitHub Action

Our actions are both [written in JavaScript](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-javascript-action). The other way of writing action is to do a [Docker container action](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-docker-container-action). The best way to start writing your action is to:

> 1. Follow [this](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-javascript-action) tutorial to create a simple action to understand it's components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Follow [this](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-javascript-action) tutorial to create a simple action to understand its components.
```

> 1. Get familiar with [official toolkit](https://github.com/actions/toolkit) that you can use to simplify writing an action. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Get familiar with the [official toolkit](https://github.com/actions/toolkit) that you can use to simplify writing an action. 
```

> 1. Create your custom action with [this](https://github.com/actions/javascript-action) template that has many things plugged in already, like eslint, testing, and most important, distro generation, so you do not have to commit `node_modules` directory to your repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create your custom action with [this template](https://github.com/actions/javascript-action) that has many things plugged in already, like eslint, testing, and most important, distro generation, so you do not have to commit `node_modules` directory to your repository.
```

> These are all the resources I used to write my first action, and to master it, I only had to read official docs, like [reference docs for "action.yml" file](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/metadata-syntax-for-github-actions). Well done GitHub!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are all the resources I used to write my first action, and to master it, I only had to read the official docs, like the [reference docs for the "action.yml" file](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/metadata-syntax-for-github-actions). Well done GitHub!
```

## What I can do today with AsyncAPI GitHub Actions

Those two actions can help you a lot already, together or separately. I present in this post only two possible workflows, and you can take it from here and think about your ideas.

### Validation of AsyncAPI files in a Pull Request

You can make sure that whenever someone makes a Pull Request to propose a change in the AsyncAPI document, you can validate it automatically using [Waleed's](https://twitter.com/WaleedAshraf01/) action `WaleedAshraf/asyncapi-github-action@v0.0.3`.

Actions can be triggered by [multiple types of events](https://help.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions). In this example, we will trigger the action on any `pull_request` event.

```yaml
name: Validate AsyncAPI document

on:
  pull_request:
  
jobs:
  validation:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    - name: asyncapi-github-action
      uses: WaleedAshraf/asyncapi-github-action@v0.0.3
      with:
        filepath: 'my-directory/asyncapi.yaml'
```

### Generating HTML and publishing it to GitHub Pages

> One of the AsyncAPI use cases is to document your application with it and generated docs out of it, best in HTML. The typical workflow here would be to have a GitHub Action workflow that your trigger on every push to the `master` branch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the AsyncAPI use cases is to define your application and generate docs out of this definition, best in HTML. The typical workflow here would be to have a GitHub Action that your trigger on every push to the `master` branch. 
```

```yaml
name: AsyncAPI documentation publishing

on:
  push:
    branches: [ master ]
```

> To generate HTML from your AsyncAPI documentation, you need to use `asyncapi/github-action-for-generator@v0.2.0` action. You also need to specify a few more things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate HTML from your AsyncAPI definition, you need to use `asyncapi/github-action-for-generator@v0.2.0` action. You also need to specify a few more things:
```

Try not to call AsyncAPI documentation. Use either document or definition. Otherwise, people could think AsyncAPI is just for documentation. This is a problem OpenAPI had since the beginning because Swagger was completely focused on documentation only.

Reviewer 2: I like definition.
@derberg and I also had long conv on this. I always called it AsyncAPI Schema.

Yes, there is a real AsyncAPI Schema also, but, to me, when someone defines their own AsyncAPI yaml file, it's also a schema?

But, calling it **definition** is much better.

Reviewer: Yes, the AsyncAPI file is a schema but the hyper-schema that we use to validate it is also a schema, and the schemas inside the file are also schemas, etc. It's so generic that it's like saying that it's a file/document but "file" and "document" are less abused in our context.

> - The template you want to use for generation. In this example, you can see official [AsyncAPI HTML Template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template). You can also write your custom template, and hosting it on npm is not mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The template you want to use for generation. In this example, you can see the official [AsyncAPI HTML Template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template). You can also write your custom template but hosting it on npm is not mandatory.
```

> - Filepath to the AsyncAPI document in case it is not in the root of the working directory, and not called `asyncapi.yml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Path to the AsyncAPI file, in case it is not in the root of the working directory and its name is not `asyncapi.yml`
```

> - The template specific parameters. The crucial part here is the `baseHref` parameter. When enabling [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) for regular repository, the URL of the Web page is `https://{GITHUB_PROFILE}.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/`. Specifying `baseHref` parameter helps the browser to properly resolve URL to relative links to additional resources like CSS or JS files. You do not have to hardcode the name of the repo in workflow configuration. Your workflow has access to information about the repository it is running in. You could do this: `${baseHref=/{github.repository}}/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The template specific parameters. The crucial part here is the `baseHref` parameter. When enabling [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) for a regular repository, the URL of the Web page is `https://{GITHUB_PROFILE}.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/`. Specifying `baseHref` parameter helps the browser to properly resolve the URLs of relative links to resources like CSS and JS files. You do not have to hardcode the name of the repo in workflow configuration. Your workflow has access to information about the repository it is running in. You could do this: `${baseHref=/{github.repository}}/`
```

- The output directory where the generator creates files. You might access those files in other steps of the workflow. 

```yaml
- name: Generating HTML from my AsyncAPI document
  uses: asyncapi/github-action-for-generator@v0.2.0
  with:
    template: '@asyncapi/html-template@0.3.0'  #In case of template from npm, because of @ it must be in quotes
    filepath: docs/api/my-asyncapi.yml
    parameters: baseHref=/test-experiment/ sidebarOrganization=byTags #space separated list of key/values
    output: generated-html
```

> Now you have a trigger, and you can generate a Web page. The next step is to publish the Web page to GitHub Pages. For this, you can use one of the actions created by the community, like `JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@3.4.2`. You can also use other hosting solutions than GitHub Pages, like, for example, Netlify and [one of their actions](https://github.com/netlify/actions/tree/master/cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you have a trigger and you can generate a Web page. The next step is to publish the generated HTML documentation to GitHub Pages. For this, you can use one of the actions created by the community, like `JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@3.4.2`. You can also use other hosting solutions than GitHub Pages, like, for example, Netlify and [one of their actions](https://github.com/netlify/actions/tree/master/cli).
```

  - name: Lukasz Gornicki
    photo: /images/avatars/lpgornicki.png
    link: https://twitter.com/derberq
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Dev Comm Keeper
---

> tl;dr
AsyncAPI community got rich with two GitHub Actions that you can use for [validation](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/asyncapi-github-action) and [generation](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/generator-for-asyncapi-documents).

There is no better reason to work on a solution if there is a bag of swags waiting for you. GitHub organized a [hackathon for GitHub Actions](https://githubhackathon.com/#hackathon), and it was the best moment to write a GitHub Action that can help AsyncAPI community.

Two AsyncAPI related actions we crafterd in March are:
- Our community member, [Waleed Ashraf](https://twitter.com/WaleedAshraf01/) created [an action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/asyncapi-github-action) to validate AsyncAPI documents with our [parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/)
- We also created [official AsyncAPI action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/generator-for-asyncapi-documents) for our [generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/).

## Writing a GitHub Action

> Our actions are both written in JavaScript. The other way of writing action is to do a Docker container action. The best way to start writing your action is to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our actions are both [written in JavaScript](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-javascript-action). The other way of writing action is to do a [Docker container action](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-docker-container-action). The best way to start writing your action is to:
```

1. Follow [this](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/creating-a-javascript-action) tutorial to create a simple action to understand it's components.
1. Get familiar with [official toolkit](https://github.com/actions/toolkit) that you can use to simplify writing an action. 
1. Create your custom action with [this](https://github.com/actions/javascript-action) template that has many things plugged in already, like eslint, testing, and most important, distro generation, so you do not have to commit `node_modules` directory to your repository.

> These are all the resources I used to write my first action, and to master it, I only had to read official docs, like reference docs for `action.yml` file. Well done GitHub!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are all the resources I used to write my first action, and to master it, I only had to read official docs, like [reference docs for "action.yml" file](https://help.github.com/en/actions/building-actions/metadata-syntax-for-github-actions). Well done GitHub!
```

## What I can do today with AsyncAPI GitHub Actions

Those two actions can help you a lot already, together or separately. I present in this post only two possible workflows, and you can take it from here and think about your ideas.

### Validation of AsyncAPI files in a Pull Request

You can make sure that whenever someone makes a Pull Request to propose a change in the AsyncAPI document, you can validate it automatically using [Waleed's](https://twitter.com/WaleedAshraf01/) action `WaleedAshraf/asyncapi-github-action@v0.0.3`.

> You only need to make sure the action reacts to `pull_request` events that make sense for you. For the sake of this example, all possible events are mentioned, depending on your setup, some might not be necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Actions can be triggered by [multiple types of events](https://help.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions). In this example, we will trigger the action on any `pull_request` event.
```

```yaml
name: Validate AsyncAPI document

on:
  pull_request:
    types:
      - labeled
      - unlabeled
      - synchronize
      - opened
      - edited
      - ready_for_review
      - reopened
      - unlocked
  pull_request_review:
    types:
      - submitted
  check_suite: 
    types:
      - completed

>   status: {}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Just to example simple and easy.

  
jobs:
  validation:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    - name: asyncapi-github-action
      uses: WaleedAshraf/asyncapi-github-action@v0.0.3
      with:
        filepath: 'my-directory/asyncapi.yaml'
```

### Generating HTML and publishing it to GitHub Pages

One of the AsyncAPI use cases is to document your application with it and generated docs out of it, best in HTML. The typical workflow here would be to have a GitHub Action workflow that your trigger on every push to the `master` branch. 

```yaml
name: AsyncAPI documentation publishing

on:
  push:
    branches: [ master ]
```

To generate HTML from your AsyncAPI documentation, you need to use `asyncapi/github-action-for-generator@v0.2.0` action. You also need to specify a few more things:
- The template you want to use for generation. In this example, you can see official [AsyncAPI HTML Template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template). You can also write your custom template, and hosting it on npm is not mandatory.
- Filepath to the AsyncAPI document in case it is not in the root of the working directory, and not called `asyncapi.yml`

> - The template specific parameters. The crucial part here is the `baseHref` parameter. When enabling [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) for regular repository, the URL of the website is `https://{GITHUB_PROFILE}.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/`. Specifying `baseHref` parameter helps the browser to properly resolve URL to relative links to additional resources like CSS or JS files. You do not have to hardcode the name of the repo in workflow configuration. Your workflow has access to information about the repository it is running in. You could do this: `${baseHref=/{github.repository}}/`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The template specific parameters. The crucial part here is the `baseHref` parameter. When enabling [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) for regular repository, the URL of the Web page is `https://{GITHUB_PROFILE}.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/`. Specifying `baseHref` parameter helps the browser to properly resolve URL to relative links to additional resources like CSS or JS files. You do not have to hardcode the name of the repo in workflow configuration. Your workflow has access to information about the repository it is running in. You could do this: `${baseHref=/{github.repository}}/`
```

- The output directory where the generator creates files. You might access those files in other steps of the workflow. 

```yaml
- name: Generating HTML from my AsyncAPI document
  uses: asyncapi/github-action-for-generator@v0.2.0
  with:
    template: '@asyncapi/html-template@0.3.0'  #In case of template from npm, because of @ it must be in quotes
    filepath: docs/api/my-asyncapi.yml
    parameters: baseHref=/test-experiment/ sidebarOrganization=byTags #space separated list of key/values
    output: generated-html
```

> Now you have a trigger, and you can generate a website. The next step is to publish a website to GitHub Pages. For this, you can use one of the actions created by the community, like `JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@3.4.2`. You can also use other hosting solutions than GitHub Pages, like, for example, Netlify and [one of their actions](https://github.com/netlify/actions/tree/master/cli).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you have a trigger, and you can generate a Web page. The next step is to publish the Web page to GitHub Pages. For this, you can use one of the actions created by the community, like `JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@3.4.2`. You can also use other hosting solutions than GitHub Pages, like, for example, Netlify and [one of their actions](https://github.com/netlify/actions/tree/master/cli).
```
